it's been 50 years since NASA's historic
Apollo 11 mission were after four days
of travel Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin
stepped out of the lunar module onto the
moon Sea of Tranquility becoming the
first humans to set foot on the lunar
surface
[Music]
being visible from Earth with a naked
eye the moon is a source of great
intrigue and fascination it is
approximately three hundred eighty-four
thousand and four hundred kilometers
from Earth and around quarter of the
size the moon is Earth's only natural
satellite taking just over 27 days to
complete an orbit but how have we
managed to learn so much about it for
thousands of years human beings have
been looking at the moon as an objects
moving in the sky and they've been
looking at its motions have been looking
at its changing phases to make sense to
their place in the universe it wasn't
until the 1600s when the first telescope
was invented that it really sort of
opened up the door to the rest of the
night sky and space in general up until
that point humans didn't know that there
were any more planets and up to Saturn
and we still weren't really sure on the
motion of the planets it was thanks to
people like Galileo who studied the
moons of Jupiter Galileo
also looked at our moon for the first
time with a telescope and he discovered
the craters and the mountains on the
moon that it actually had these
different sort of textures and he
discovered that the moon was orbiting
around the earth because he made notes
of the different phases through
magnifications they realized that the
moon was not just a perfect unblemished
circle but in fact it was of world and
if the moon was world and it had
geological features then perhaps the
earth was itself a cosmological object
so the moon changed our understanding of
our place in the universe the Royal
Observatory has had a presence here in
Greenwich London for nearly 350 years
with the initial aim of providing clear
our navigational support for sea travel
since 1884 it was recognized by the
world as the prime meridian zero degrees
longitude
the dividing line between the eastern
and western hemispheres and the home of
Greenwich Mean Time through its
telescopes the vast expense of space has
been explored and studied so how has the
work carried out here and at similar
sites
helped shape our understanding of space
here at the observatory we've made
several discoveries including a mewn of
Jupiter called passive a which was
discovered in 1908 in the 50 years since
the 1969 Apollo 11 landings we've
learned so much those missions
absolutely revolutionized lunar and
planetary science the astronauts brought
back 382 kilos of moon rock and soil
which is still being studied here on
earth as we've been improving technology
and instruments have become better we're
able to extract the new data from these
samples all the time thanks to the rock
side webb road back by the Apollo
program we now think that when a planet
the size of Mars entered in collision
with the Earth's on 4.5 billion years
ago from the debris created by this
collision the moon was formed it's
consistent sunlight reflecting presents
in our skies makes it a source of
endless discussion but is the moon
really that significant does it have any
impact on our life on Earth the moon has
influenced human activities in so many
ways people have been looking up to the
moon and realizing that it has a
recurring pattern resister been using
the moon to mark time
so some cultures would have a purely
lunar calendar we have some cultures
which use a lunisolar calendar so both
inspired by as the moon's motions and
phases and by as a movement of the earth
around the Sun the moon also has got
significant influence for navigation in
as much as it has got an influence on
the tides it's influenced writing such
an it's influenced perhaps playwrights
and then perhaps more fascinating of all
for me the moon has inspired
painters some of the greatest works
about around the world have been
inspired
by moonlight and have been trying to
capture the ethereal qualities of the
light so 50 years on from man first
sitting foot on the lunar landscape our
understanding of the moon and wider
space has increased massively telescopes
such as this one have been pivotal in
unlocking some of spaces greatest
secrets as well as offering fascinating
insights into understanding what lies
beyond Earth's atmosphere
the moon has not just provided a focus
for curious mind however it is clear
that our nearest celestial neighbor has
had a significant impact in a cultural
context as will the physical effect we
experience here on earth we have a
number of Lin emissions which are
planned by robotic missions and crewed
missions so we are still thinking about
bringing humans back onto the moon's
surface and discovering different
elements on the moon discovering
different minerals might be holding the
keys to more secrets
as human exploration is the next step
for the me the next step fair
observational astronomy so using
telescopes is looking much further
afield and actually expand the
observable universe as we know it so we
can see further afield and further back
in time I think also one of the things
that we learn from the Apple space
program was to look at the earth in
different ways and I wonder whether in
2019 as we are grappling with the
consequences of the climate crisis
thinking again about going to the moon
might make us again look back on
ourselves
so as explorations and observations of
space continue and with technological
innovations enabling a greater
understanding of what lies beyond our
planet's atmosphere we will have to keep
watch to see what part the moon will
play in our lives on earth in the next
50 years
[Music]
you